---
title: RxSwift
date: 2021-08-29 06:38:10 +0400
categories: [Notes]
tags: [swift, rxswift]
---

## Observables
- Observables are lazy. 
- Observables are lazy in the sense that they only execute values when something subscribes to it. 
- For each subscriber the Observable starts a new execution, resulting in the fact that the data is not shared.
- An Observable by default is unicast. 

> **Unicasting** means that each subscribed observer owns an independent execution of the Observable.

> **Multicasting** basically means that one Observable execution is shared among multiple subscribers.

### Cold Observables
- When the data is produced by the Observable itself, we call it a cold Observable. 

```swift
let observable = Observable<Int>.create { $0.next(Math.random()) }
observable.subscribe { print($0) } // prints random number
observable.subscribe { print($0) } // prints random number different from above
```
- Above example is of Cold as data is produced inside the observable.
- Two subscription almost at the same time still new execution for each subscription makes it **Unicasting**.

### Hot Observables
- When the data is produced outside the Observable, we call it a hot Observable.

```swift
let random = Math.random()
let observable = Observable<Int>.create { $0.next(random) }
observable.subscribe { print($0) } // prints random number
observable.subscribe { print($0) } // prints same number as above
```
- Above example is of Hot as data is produced outside of the observable.
- We still have two subscriber so observable will still execute TWO times. Not shared.
- Since observable produced the same data it is **Multicasting**.

## Subjects
- Ref: [http://reactivex.io/documentation/subject.html]()
- A Subject is like an `Observable`. It can be subscribed to, just like you normally would with Observables.
- A Subject also has methods like `next()`, `error()` and `complete()` just like the observer you normally pass to your Observable creation function.
- Subjects can multicast, since an Observable by default is unicast. A subject is used to multicast values, which means observable execution is shared between subscribers.
- Subjects maintain a registry of many listeners. When calling subscribe on a Subject it does not invoke a new execution that delivers data. It simply registers the given Observer in a list of Observers.

```swift
let subject = PublishSubject<Int>()
subject.subscribe { print($0) } // prints random number
subject.subscribe { print($0) } // prints the same number as above
subject.onNext(Math.random()) // emits one value which all the subscribers get
```

> Whereas Observables are solely data producers, Subjects can both be used as a data producer and a data consumer. By using Subjects as a data consumer you can use them to convert Observables from unicast to multicast.

```swift
let subject = PublishSubject<Int>()
subject.subscribe { print($0) } // prints random number
subject.subscribe { print($0) } // prints the same number as above

let observable = Observable<Int>.create { $0.next(Math.random()) }
observable.subscribe(subject.onNext($0))
```
When Observable subscriptions receive different values, we use Subjects. Subjects will make sure each subscription gets the exact same value as the Observable execution is shared among the subscribers.

### Async Subject: 
- An AsyncSubject emits the last value (and only the last value) emitted by the source Observable, and only after that source Observable completes.
- If the source Observable does not emit any values, the AsyncSubject also completes without emitting any values.

### Behavior Subject
- When an observer subscribes to a BehaviorSubject, it begins by emitting the item most recently emitted by the source Observable (or a seed/default value if none has yet been emitted) and then continues to emit any other items emitted later by the source Observable(s).

### Publish Subject
- PublishSubject emits to an observer only those items that are emitted by the source Observable(s) subsequent to the time of the subscription.

### Replay Subject
- ReplaySubject emits to any observer all of the items that were emitted by the source Observable(s), regardless of when the observer subscribes.
- There are also versions of ReplaySubject that will throw away old items once the replay buffer threatens to grow beyond a certain size, or when a specified timespan has passed since the items were originally emitted.

## Relays
RxRelay provides three kinds of Relays: PublishRelay, BehaviorRelay and ReplayRelay. They behave exactly like their parallel Subjects, with two changes:
- Relays never complete.
- Relays never emit errors.

In essence, Relays only emit .next events, and never terminate.

## Traits
<!-- https://github.com/ReactiveX/RxSwift/blob/main/Documentation/Traits.md -->

### Single
A Single is a variation of Observable that, instead of emitting a series of elements, is always guaranteed to emit either a single element or an error.
- Emits exactly one element, or an error.
- Doesn't share side effects.

## Why it does not have `.empty()` operator
`Observable.empty().asSingle → fatalError()` as Single either emit or error out. That is why Single does not have `.empty` because `.empty()` completes with no event. Where Maybe and Completable has `.empty()` operators.

> Always handle the error from API as when a subscription is error out. It kills the subscription and not catching any error could result in never emitting any future value.

### Maybe
A Maybe is a variation of Observable that is right in between a Single and a Completable. It can either emit a single element, complete without emitting an element, or emit an error.
- Emits either a completed event, a single element or an error.
- Doesn't share side effects.

**Note:** Any of these three events would terminate the Maybe, meaning - a Maybe that completed can't also emit an element, and a Maybe that emitted an element can't also send a Completion event.

### Completable
A Completable is a variation of Observable that can only complete or emit an error. It is guaranteed to not emit any elements.
- Emits zero elements.
- Emits a completion event, or an error.
- Doesn't share side effects.

### Driver
- RxCocoa trait
- Can't error out.
- Observe occurs on main scheduler.
- Shares side effects (share(replay: 1, scope: .whileConnected)).

### Signal
A Signal is similar to Driver with one difference, it does not replay the latest event on subscription, but subscribers still share the sequence's computational resources.
- Can't error out.
- Delivers events on Main Scheduler.
- Shares computational resources (share(scope: .whileConnected)).
- Does NOT replay elements on subscription.

### Control Property
- Trait for Observable/ObservableType that represents a property of UI element.
- Sequence of values only represents initial control value and user initiated value changes. Programmatic value changes won't be reported.
It's properties are:
- it never fails
- share(replay: 1) behavior
- it's stateful, upon subscription (calling subscribe) last element is immediately replayed if it was produced
- it will Complete sequence on control being deallocated
- it never errors out
- it delivers events on MainScheduler.instance
- The implementation of ControlProperty will ensure that sequence of events is being subscribed on main scheduler (subscribeOn(ConcurrentMainScheduler.instance) behavior).

```swift
extension Reactive where Base: UISegmentedControl {
    /// Reactive wrapper for `selectedSegmentIndex` property.
    public var selectedSegmentIndex: ControlProperty<Int> {
        value
    }
    
    /// Reactive wrapper for `selectedSegmentIndex` property.
    public var value: ControlProperty<Int> {
        return UIControl.rx.value(
            self.base,
            getter: { segmentedControl in
                segmentedControl.selectedSegmentIndex
            }, setter: { segmentedControl, value in
                segmentedControl.selectedSegmentIndex = value
            }
        )
    }
}
```

### ControlEvent
Trait for Observable/ObservableType that represents an event on a UI element.

It's properties are:
- it never fails
- it won't send any initial value on subscription
- it will Complete sequence on control being de-allocated
- it never errors out
- it delivers events on MainScheduler.instance
- The implementation of ControlEvent will ensure that sequence of events is being subscribed on main scheduler (subscribeOn(ConcurrentMainScheduler.instance) behavior).

```swift
extension Reactive where Base: UICollectionView {
    
    /// Reactive wrapper for `delegate` message `collectionView:didSelectItemAtIndexPath:`.
    public var itemSelected: ControlEvent<IndexPath> {
        let source = delegate.methodInvoked(#selector(UICollectionViewDelegate.collectionView(_:didSelectItemAt:)))
            .map { a in
                return a[1] as! IndexPath
            }
        
        return ControlEvent(events: source)
    }
}
```

<!-- 
[Hot & Cold] https://luukgruijs.medium.com/understanding-hot-vs-cold-observables-62d04cf92e03 
[Subject] https://luukgruijs.medium.com/understanding-rxjs-subjects-339428a1815b
[]
-->

- `Sample`: Emit the most recent items emitted by an Observable within periodic time intervals
- `ThrottleFirst`: Emits not the most-recently emitted item in the sample period, but the first item that was emitted during that period.
- `Scan` (Keep state): The Scan operator applies a function to the first item emitted by the source Observable and then emits the result of that function as its own first emission. It also feeds the result of the function back into the function along with the second item emitted by the source Observable in order to generate its second emission. It continues to feed back its own subsequent emissions along with the subsequent emissions from the source Observable in order to create the rest of its sequence. This sort of operator is sometimes called an “accumulator” in other contexts.
- `Reduce`: Produces a final result.
- `Share`: shares the result, We use the share operator when we need the chain of operators not to re-execute upon every subscription. Thus, everything before share is executed only once
- `Infallible`: Guaranteed to not emit error events
- `flatMap`: keeps up with each and every observable it creates, one for each element added onto the source observable
- `flatMapLatest`: What makes flatMapLatest different is that it will automatically switch to the latest observable and unsubscribe from the the previous one. flatMapLatest is actually a combination of the map and switchLatest operators.
https://github.com/baconjs/bacon.js/wiki/Diagrams 

## `observeOn` vs. `subscribeOn`
* the “subscription code” is the code that gets called from your subscribe() and is located in Observable.create { ... }. This is the code that creates your subscription and produces elements.
* the “observation code” is where you observe for emitted elements - this is the code you provide in onNext: { ... }, onCompleted: {...}, etc. This is where you do your observing.

Schedulers
* MainScheduler.instance which schedulers work on the main thread and
* ConcurrentDispatchQueueScheduler which uses GCD to execute work on a given queue.

subscribeOn operator - it allows you to change the scheduler on which the subscription code will be executed.


Throttle vs Debounce vs Sample

https://medium.com/fantageek/throttle-vs-debounce-in-rxswift-86f8b303d5d4
https://stackoverflow.com/a/48053935 


Throttle: the original function be called at most once per specified period.
Debounce: the original function be called after the caller stops calling the decorated function after a specified period.

Sample picked up the latest emitted event, whereas Throttle turned off the stream for 2 seconds and waited for the next one to be emitted.

```
-- Getting value from observable example ---
2022-01-26 13:19:47.706: Event -> subscribed
2022-01-26 13:19:47.711: Sample -> subscribed
2022-01-26 13:19:48.707: Event -> Event next(0)
2022-01-26 13:19:49.707: Event -> Event next(1)
2022-01-26 13:19:49.716: Sample -> Event next(1)
2022-01-26 13:19:50.707: Event -> Event next(2)
2022-01-26 13:19:51.707: Event -> Event next(3)
2022-01-26 13:19:51.716: Sample -> Event next(3)
2022-01-26 13:19:52.707: Event -> Event next(4)
2022-01-26 13:19:53.706: Event -> Event next(5)
2022-01-26 13:19:53.716: Sample -> Event next(5)
2022-01-26 13:19:54.707: Event -> Event next(6)
2022-01-26 13:19:55.707: Event -> Event next(7)
2022-01-26 13:19:55.715: Sample -> Event next(7)
2022-01-26 13:19:56.707: Event -> Event next(8)
```

```--- Getting value from observable example ---
2022-01-26 13:20:39.619: Event -> subscribed
2022-01-26 13:20:39.623: Throttle -> subscribed
2022-01-26 13:20:40.619: Event -> Event next(0)
2022-01-26 13:20:40.624: Throttle -> Event next(0)
2022-01-26 13:20:41.619: Event -> Event next(1)
2022-01-26 13:20:42.619: Event -> Event next(2)
2022-01-26 13:20:42.624: Throttle -> Event next(2)
2022-01-26 13:20:43.619: Event -> Event next(3)
2022-01-26 13:20:44.619: Event -> Event next(4)
2022-01-26 13:20:44.624: Throttle -> Event next(4)
2022-01-26 13:20:45.619: Event -> Event next(5)
2022-01-26 13:20:46.619: Event -> Event next(6)
2022-01-26 13:20:46.624: Throttle -> Event next(6)
2022-01-26 13:20:47.619: Event -> Event next(7)
2022-01-26 13:20:48.619: Event -> Event next(8)
2022-01-26 13:20:48.624: Throttle -> Event next(8)
2022-01-26 13:20:49.619: Event -> Event next(9)
2022-01-26 13:20:50.619: Event -> Event next(10)
2022-01-26 13:20:50.624: Throttle -> Event next(10)
2022-01-26 13:20:51.619: Event -> Event next(11)


