---
title: NSObject
date: 2021-09-06 08:01:10 +0400
categories: [Notes]
tags: [nsobject]
---

## +load vs. +initialize

* (**last**) init < alloc < initialize < load (**first**)
* http://stackoverflow.com/a/13326633/559017
* https://www.mikeash.com/pyblog/friday-qa-2009-05-22-objective-c-class-loading-and-initialization.html

There are two methods that are automatically invoked by the Objective-C runtime for each class. `+load` is sent when the class is initially loaded, while `+initialise` is called just before the application calls its first method on that class or an instance of that class. Both are optional, and are executed only if the method is implemented.

**Method Swizzling**
Because method swizzling affects global state, it is important to minimise the possibility of race conditions. `+load` is guaranteed to be loaded during class initialisation, which provides a modicum of consistency for changing system-wide behaviour. By contrast, `+initialize` provides no such guarantee of when it will be executed—in fact, it may never be called, if that class is never messaged directly by the app.

**_+ (void)load_**
Invoked whenever a class or **category** is added to the Objective-C runtime; implement this method to perform class-specific behaviour upon loading.
The load message is sent to classes and categories that are both dynamically loaded and statically linked, but only if the newly loaded class or category implements a method that can respond.
The order of initialization is as follows:

* All initialisers in any framework you link to.
* All +load methods in your image.
* All C++ static initialisers and C/C++ `__attribute__(constructor)` functions in your image.
* All initialisers in frameworks that link to you.

**In addition:**

* A class’s `+load` method is called after all of its superclasses’ +load methods.
* A category `+load` method is called after the class’s own +load method.

In a custom implementation of load you can therefore safely message other unrelated classes from the same image, but any load methods implemented by those classes may not have run yet.

**_+ (void)initialize_ -** Initialises the class before it receives its first message.
The runtime sends initialise to each class in a program just before the class, or any class that inherits from it, is sent its first message from within the program. The runtime sends the initialize message to classes in a thread-safe manner. Superclasses receive this message before their subclasses. The superclass implementation may be called multiple times if subclasses do not implement initialise—the runtime will call the inherited implementation—or if subclasses explicitly call `[super initialize]`. If you want to protect yourself from being run multiple times, you can structure your implementation along these lines:

```
`+ (void)initialize {
`  if (self == [ClassName self]) {
    `// ... do the initialization ...
  }
} ```
```

* Because **initialise is called in a thread-safe manner** and the order of initialise being called on different classes is **not guaranteed**, it’s important to do the minimum amount of work necessary in initialise methods. Specifically, any code that takes locks that might be required by other classes in their initialize methods is liable to lead to deadlocks. Therefore you should not rely on initialize for complex initialisation, and should instead limit it to straightforward, class local initialisation.
* **Initialize is invoked only once per class.** If you want to perform independent initialization for the class and for categories of the class, you should implement load methods.


